Welcome to the Darwin printing session.
My name is Richard Blanchard.
I am the engineering
manager for printing.
I have a very brief story
for you this afternoon,
but it's a really good
story and it should warm the
hearts of all you optimists.
Oh, there's a few of you.
The story starts actually with
a definition of serendipity that
I've always been very fond of.
And that is serendipity is looking
for a needle in the haystack and
fighting the farmer's daughter.
So for us,
our needle was a printing system that
we could open up and use in Darwin,
but that was also powerful
enough for us to use in OS X.
The Haystack we were digging through
had a lot of different options in it.
We could take our OS X printing system,
open it up, bring it to Darwin.
We could write a new one from scratch,
we know how to do that.
Or we could take any one of
the half dozen or so existing
open source printing systems.
Well, we found an answer,
and it was a very good answer.
We found CUPS,
the Common UNIX Printing System,
from Easy Software Products.
It's available under the
GNU General Public License,
so we can use it in Darwin.
It's incredibly powerful,
so it'll let us do everything
we wanted to do in OS X.
It's based upon a few
simple direct concepts,
in particular IPP,
the Internet Printing Protocol,
and PostScript printer description files.
Now our existing OS X printing
system is also based upon IPP.
It was designed around it,
so we're comfortable with that.
And we've been using
PostScript printer description
files on Mac OSes for over a decade.
So the two simple direct concepts
in CUPS we're very comfortable with.
But there's more.
It gets even better.
The story just keeps improving.
It's well documented.
We announced on Monday that we were
going to use CUPS in Darwin and in OS X.
And on Monday,
there was great documentation available.
The truth is,
it was available long before Monday,
and the truth is,
we had nothing to do with it.
But nonetheless, our printing systems are
incredibly well documented.
So please, go online, go to CUPS.org.
You'll find a half dozen or so
documents describing CUPS from
different vantage points.
You'll find news groups
and a mailing list.
But, what you should really do,
and if you want to understand
the Darwin Printing System,
and you want to understand
the OS X Printing System,
you need this book.
This book.
The book that I have three copies of.
The books that you can buy
over in the vendor hall.
The books that you absolutely
must read if you're going to
understand what we're doing.
Point made?
So, that's why we're using CUPS.
That's how you can find out more
about what we're doing with CUPS.
That's the really great story I have,
which is that we had some needs,
and we found an answer that
met all our expectations.
I want to take a brief moment and
talk about layering in CUPS because
you can get the CUPS source code
now from a couple different places.
The pure place, the place you get pure
CUPS is from CUPS.org.
If you really want to see what
the CUPS source code looks like,
go there.
That is the clearinghouse.
But because we're going to use it
in OS X and it's released under
the GNU General Public License,
we also need to give you the
source code that we're using in
OS X and we're doing that through
Darwin because Darwin's also using CUPS.
So you can go to Darwin as of Monday and
download the source code that we're using
in Darwin that we're using in Jaguar.
It's right there.
You can download it and see what the
spooling system is that we're using.
We still have pieces
that are closed in OS X,
but the spooling system is open.
You can get that source code.
That source code that's on Darwin does
remove a few pieces from the
CUPS distribution you'd find on CUPS.org.
That's for some legal reasons.
We're trying to work
through some of those.
But you can go get those pieces because
they're also under GPL and add them back.
There's nothing to stop you from that.
When you get that piece that
we put in Darwin -- again,
this is -- is this Darwin's -- this
is a CUPS repository that we keep.
It's live.
So as we work on Jaguar,
you can see the changes
we're putting in there.
When we check something in,
you see it immediately.
So we take that, we put it in OS X,
and we put a couple pieces back.
In particular,
we put back some of our Quartz pieces.
We put in a piece that can convert from
PDF to raster and PDF to PostScript.
Those pieces right now are closed.
We have plans to make them open.
So again, two messages.
We're very happy and
excited to be using CUPS.
It's open.
Here's how you can get it.
If you want to see pure CUPS,
go to CUPS.org.
If you want to see what we're doing,
go to Darwin.
But CUPS is the most interesting.
It's really what we're
talking about here today.
Michael Sweet is the architect of CUPS.
He's also the author of the CUPS book,
which is why it's so good.
He has graciously flown out here to talk
to you today to describe what CUPS is,
what you get from CUPS.org and mostly
what you get from CUPS in Darwin.
So, Michael.
Hi, as I said, my name is Mike Sweet.
I'm co-owner of
Easy Software Products and I'm
the guy responsible for CUPS.
What is CUPS?
Well, CUPS is a replacement for all the
existing Unix printing systems
that you may have seen in the past.
One of the problems with the traditional
Unix printing systems is they've been
developed for printing text files.
LPR and system 5 printing
were developed in the '70s.
And back then,
all you really had were text printers.
And it did that job really well,
but it doesn't really work these days.
CUPS goes away from that.
Instead of thinking of printing
text files or PostScript files,
it thinks in terms of printing documents.
So what we call it is a
complete printing solution.
Now who's using CUPS besides Apple?
Well, you'll find that most of the
Linux distributions that are
out there now include CUPS.
Now if you have FreeBSD or
OpenBSD or NetBSD,
those operating systems include
a ports package for CUPS.
Most of the major printer
manufacturers have CUPS drivers or
are using CUPS in their products.
Examples here are Canon and
Okidata licensed CUPS for use
in their printing products.
Canon is using it for some
internal R&D stuff right now,
but Okidata will be shipping
it with their products.
Absinth,
Genicom and Xerox have funded development
or provided to us printers and support
to support their products and they're
very excited about using CUPS as well.
In the free software arena,
there's GIMP Print,
which provides some really
high quality printer drivers.
You can use those directly
in Darwin or in Mac OS X.
And then the KDE project,
if you're using that with Darwin,
also includes complete support for CUPS.
Now as I mentioned before,
CUPS is designed to print
modern document formats,
PDF, PostScript, image files like TIFF,
basically anything you're likely
to run into we can support.
LPD was designed just
to print text files,
so it's really not up to the task.
When the user uses CUPS,
instead of dealing with, "Okay,
I've got a PostScript file,
so I know I can print it to this printer,
but this other printer
doesn't support it,
so I can't print that file there,
so I have to run some other program
to generate the print file,"
CUPS takes care of that for the user,
so the user never has
to worry about that.
Instead of using LPD,
we chose to use IPP,
which was just coming out at
the time we were designing CUPS.
It's a really good move because
IPP really provides the full range of
attributes that you need for printing,
and it also provides things like
authentication and encryption
support that was missing from LPD.
When you're using CUPS,
you can support PostScript printers
just by using the PPD files that are
already available for Mac OS or Windows.
It doesn't require anything different.
The PPD files naturally describe every
feature that's available on the printer,
at least as far as the
manufacturer is exposing.
And you'll be able to print
duplexed or on special media.
And it'll handle all that
transparently to you and the user.
If you want to support a
non-post-script printer driver,
then you write a special filter and
provide a PPD file that tells CUPS to
use that filter when it's printing.
So as far as the application
and the user are concerned,
everything looks like
a post-script printer.
Now the good thing about using
PPD files is you can use the same
PPD files in every operating system.
So we can support Mac OS clients
from UNIX servers,
we can support Windows clients
from Mac servers.
It really doesn't matter.
Everybody can use a PPD file and
everybody's got a PostScript driver,
so that all works.
The same filters that you
write for one operating system,
unless they're using something that's
really operating system specific,
will work on another operating
system just by recompiling it.
And that piece, all the device specific,
operating system specific
stuff is handled by a separate
program that CUPS provides.
IPP was designed from the ground up
to support things like access control,
security, encryption,
where LPD was just a little
hack that they came up with.
As far as I've seen,
it's just been over a few
days as the usual story.
And it really isn't set up to do anything
more complicated than listing a set
of hosts that are allowed to print.
Another advantage of IPP is
you can pass in any kind of
job attributes that you want,
so that you can say,
"This is a double-sided document," or,
"This needs to be printed
on photo media," and,
"This is the resolution I need
to print at." Whereas LPD,
there's really no support for that.
There's been some vendor
extensions for that,
but they're not standard,
so you can't rely on them.
As I mentioned before,
there's authentication,
access control and encryption,
which LPD completely lacks.
Now, in the old days,
you had a text file you
wanted to print or a man page.
You just LPR the file and
everything worked pretty well.
Same thing happens with CUPS.
Commands are exactly the same,
plus you have the option of using command
line options to control the media and in
this case use the Pretty Print option,
which is the equivalent of the old
However, if you have a PDF document and
you want to print double-sided,
there's really no way to tell LPD to
do that or even to print the PDF file
unless you have a special filter added,
and then that filter depends
on which printer you've got.
With COPS,
all printers support PDF files.
All printers support PostScript files.
All printers support JPEG files,
and they all take the
same kinds of options.
Now, in this example,
we print on legal size media
and do two-sided printing on the
long which just means you're not
flipping a page on each side.
If you had a printer that
doesn't support duplex printing,
it'll go through and
print single-sided and,
you know, if you send the IPP request,
it'll actually come back and say, "Sorry,
this option wasn't supported,
but I'm going to print your file anyway."
[Transcript missing]
Now, as far as the design of CUPS,
it implements version 1.1 of IPP.
This is a version that's on the
standards track within the IETF,
and basically just about
everybody supports it.
There's a few exceptions.
Microsoft only supports IPP 1.0.
We are compatible with 1.0 clients,
so you can still print,
but there's a few things that if
you're talking to a Microsoft server,
it has to kind of go into
back compatibility mode.
CUPS itself has a small central server
that handles any client connections,
any network communications and actually
scheduling and printing the jobs.
It's just a big finite state
machine and it does what it needs
to do and then fires off other
processes to do the hard work.
Any applications that want to
send a print job or get a PPD file
and pop up options for the user
just have to communicate with
the scheduler via HTTP and IPP.
IPP is layered over HTTP.
There's also a web browser interface.
Now, the nice thing about this interface
is that you can have users open
up the interface to be able to
access the documentation online.
You can provide your own content if you
have specific rules for how you send a
print job and where you go to get it and
if you don't pick up your job within five
minutes we're going to throw it away,
that sort of thing.
It also lets you monitor print jobs,
printers,
classes and for the administrator
to do administrative functions.
When a job gets printed,
it fires off a set of programs called
filters and those are all piped into
a back end program which actually
communicates with the printer.
There's back ends for parallel, serial,
USB.
There's a new fire wire interface
going into the new version of CUPS.
Plus a bunch of network protocols,
app socket for Jet Direct type of thing,
LPD for older network
interfaces and of course IPP.
All of the printers and jobs
and devices in CUPS are managed
dynamically by the scheduler.
So if you have a new
network interface come up,
it can recognize that and
start using it right away.
Similarly, new devices, new printers,
new jobs,
all that information is dynamic.
So you don't have to worry about
reconfiguring the scheduler and then,
"Oh, I have to restart it every time."
This is a simplified
block diagram of CUPS.
The commands communicate
to the scheduler via IPP.
And there's also a series of mini daemons
that provide some auxiliary functions.
One of them provides LPD client support.
There's another that does polling so
you can cross the subnet barrier and
we'll cover that a little bit later.
And then all the filters,
printer drivers,
backends and so forth are invoked
by the scheduler and communicate
with the scheduler as things happen.
Now if you send a print job,
you run the LPR command,
it actually takes the print file,
opens up the connection
with the scheduler,
says, "Okay,
is this printer okay for me to print to,
number one?" It is.
"Alright, here's the options,
here's the job file,
go ahead and print it." Scheduler
will copy that job file into
its spool directory and then
schedule it for printing.
There are certain
options that you can set.
You can tell it to hold the job
until the operator releases it.
You can have it print at night,
so if you have a long job,
you don't want to tie up the printer.
You can do that.
It's very flexible.
Once the job does get scheduled to print,
it goes through,
it determines which filters to run
and which printer drivers to run.
It fires those off so they can
start reading the document file.
And then the back end opens up
a connection to the printer,
whether it's a network printer
or a locally connected printer.
The filters don't really care.
And they all communicate
data back and forth.
In the case of supporting LPD clients,
we have that mini-demon called CUPS LPD.
It handles all the requests,
talks to the scheduler,
passes on those things.
So if the user asks for a job listing,
it'll get that information
from the scheduler.
If the user wants to submit a file,
it goes through and gets put
into the spool directory.
And you can start and stop printers and
do all those sorts of things via LPD.
From the user's perspective and
from the developer's perspective,
CUPS provides a lot of stuff.
There's command line interfaces,
the web interfaces,
we've talked about those a
little bit and we'll cover
those in depth in a second here.
All of the filter and driver
interfaces and various other
services for applications.
Now,
your typical Berkeley printing commands,
which you're probably most familiar with,
your LPC, LPR, LPQ and LPRM,
those are all available and
those are all fully functional.
They look just like the originals.
They also provide the System 5 commands.
These may be less familiar to you,
but these are the ones that are
provided on AT&T System 5 based UNIXs.
Accept and reject will allow the printer
to accept or reject new print jobs.
So if you're having a
problem with the printer,
you can actually tell the queue
to stop accepting new requests
until you solve the problem.
Cancel does the same thing as LPRM,
it cancels a job.
Enable and disable,
start and stop the printer.
So if you have to stop the printer
to change a toner cartridge or
something and you don't want it
to try printing any new jobs,
you can tell it to do so.
LP is the same as LPR.
LP admin is the command you use to do
command line printer administration,
add new printers, delete printers,
set up classes.
And LP stat is the equivalent
to LPQ in the Berkeley world.
Now as far as the CUPS commands go,
there's two that you might
use as an administrator.
The first is CUPS Add SMB.
This is the program that you
use to export your printer
drivers from CUPS into Samba,
and then the Samba drivers
can be downloaded by
Windows clients automatically.
They see the printer in
the network neighborhood,
they double click on the printer,
and it will download the printer
driver from Samba and install
it on a local Windows client.
So it's very easy to set up printers and
share them with Windows clients that way.
CUPSd is the actual scheduler program.
Normally you won't have to run this,
but if you're doing things with a
scheduler and you want to stop it,
that's a process you'd kill,
and then you could start it back up.
There's also the init scripts as usual.
Some other CUPS commands, there's LPINFO,
which allows you to list
devices that are available on
the system and printer drivers.
There's short and long forms.
The short forms are easily
parsable by programs and scripts.
The long forms are nice for the
user so they can see all the details
about the particular drivers.
LPMOVE moves jobs from one printer
to another and LPOPTIONS sets up
default options for the printers.
Now, one of the nice things about
LPOPTIONS as well is you can
set up instances of printers.
So if you have a LaserJet and you want
the default to print duplex but you
want to offer a simplex queue as well,
rather than setting up
a separate print queue,
you just set up a separate instance.
And for LPOPTIONS you just specify
LaserJet/simplex and that would
set up a separate instance of
that printer with new options.
The web interface is very simple.
It's all template driven.
The front page there has just listed
out what tasks you can do on it.
There's links there to
download the software,
get online help, manage your jobs,
manage your printers,
all very straight-forward.
Whenever there's an administrative task,
you try to do a wizard type
of interface rather than type
everything in on one form and then
expect the user to know what to do.
So it's very flexible that way.
And you can customize this.
So if you want to have your own header on
the top or have your own look and feel,
you can completely replace the
templates that come with CUPS and
provide your own local version.
This is a list of the printers that
are available on that one system.
And as you see,
there's various commands that you can
access right from each printer to resume,
to start the printer, stop the printer,
accept jobs, reject jobs,
set options for the printer,
reconfigure the printer.
So if the IP address of the
printer changes and you want to,
you've hard coded the
IP address in there,
you can go in and modify the
printer without having to do an
And it also shows you
your default printer,
so if you need to change that,
you can set the default
from inside of there.
As I said,
you can customize all of the user
interface with HTML templates,
but you can also localize the interface.
So if you have users that
are speaking French and users
that are speaking English,
you can provide a
French version of the templates.
Just put them in a subdirectory.
The web interface will detect what
language is preferred by the browser
and will use the appropriate templates.
So it's very easy to add
support for other languages.
The file filter interface
is really where CUPS shines.
You can put in any kind of file
format and as long as you identify
this is how I know it's a Foo file
and this is how I convert from
Foo to PostScript and so forth,
then you can support any kind
of document you might run into.
The scheduler keeps track of all of
the available filters on the system
and all of the available file types.
And when a print job comes in,
it will determine what type of
file is being printed and then
see what's the best way to get
that file printed for a printer.
It goes through,
finds the least cost solution, you know,
whether it's running one
program or five programs.
It keeps track of the relative
cost of each filter and
uses the right combination.
The filters that come with
CUPS print international text,
and by that I mean all of the
ISO and Windows character sets
plus UTF-8 for Unicode text.
There's a PostScript filter
for printing PostScript files
and also for converting the
PostScript files to a device-dependent
format for ripping later.
There's a PDF filter for
printing PDF files and an HPGL2
filter for printing HPGL2 files.
A lot of printers don't
support those formats directly,
so this makes sure that you can
print from a CAD application,
for example,
that's designed to just produce HPGL2.
There's also image file filters.
What we chose to do rather than just
converting to PostScript and using the
PostScript rep is we actually have a
Image File RIP that generates raster
images directly for raster printers
and a PostScript filter that generates
PostScript for PostScript printers.
It's a lot more efficient.
And then the PostScript RIP handles
printing PostScript files directly.
All of the non-postscript printers
drivers use a common raster format.
It's basically a page header at
the top that says these are the
options to use for this page
and then the raster data itself.
The header also includes the
dimensions of the raster data,
the color space that's being used,
resolution and so forth.
There's several sample
drivers included with CUPS.
Covers most of the Epson and HP printers.
There's also Okidata dot matrix
support and Dymo label printer,
which is kind of an oddball,
but it was easy to support.
Now if you go to write
your own file filter,
it's very basic rule.
You convert from one format to another.
And you tell the scheduler,
"These are the formats I support in,
and this is the format that comes
out." And that's all you gotta do.
Some filters are used both as an actual
printer driver and some are just used as
an inline filter to go to something else.
The PostScript to PostScript filter
is an example of one that's used
to go both as a printer driver
and into the PostScript rep.
Because it does the,
all the page sorting and inserting
of page commands and that sort
of thing that goes on either
directly to a PostScript printer
or into the PostScript rep.
The Image to PostScript filter
is another example.
That's the one that takes an
image file and converts it into
PostScript for a particular printer.
Now most of the filters you'll see
in CUPS either produce PostScript or
they produce a raster string.
You may have other programs that go
to some other intermediate format.
There's a CGM to HPGL filter out there,
I think on the bazaar,
and that would then convert CGM to
HPGL2 and then the HPGL2 would
get converted to PostScript and
so forth until it got printed.
Now filters that produce
raster data are called RIPs.
Every filter that you're going
to write takes seven standard
arguments on the command line.
The argument zero is
normally your program name.
In CUPS we pass it through
as the printer name.
This is kind of compatible with the
System 5 interface script mechanism.
And you'll find that all of the
arguments here are actually compatible.
So if you have a legacy printer
driver for System 5 printing system,
you can still use those and
it just treats it as a do
all filter within the system.
Each filter gets the current job ID,
the printer name,
the user name for the person
that's printing the job,
a title for the job, the number of copies
that need to be produced,
and then any options
that are going through.
The first filter gets
the file to be printed.
That's the file that's
in the spool directory.
Every other filter after that has
to read from the standard input.
So one of the rules when writing
a filter for CUPS is that your
filter has to be able to read from
standard input or from a file.
If you can't read from
a standard input stream,
then you have to copy standard input to
a temporary file and then deal with that.
There's some filters,
like the PDF filter,
that have to work that way because
they need random access to the file.
There's a lot of environment
variables that get passed in.
Some of these are kind of like what
you get from a CGI application.
Some of these are CUPS specific.
Some of the ones to keep
in mind is CUPS data dir,
which defines where to
find the CUPS data files.
This allows your filter to not be
hard coded for a particular path
that CUPS might be installed with.
And also CUPS server route,
which tells you where to find
your configuration files.
The device URI is the actual device that
your driver will eventually talk to.
Now, we've kind of loosely modeled all
of the printer communications to
a final device URI that describes,
well, this is an IPP printer,
or this is a serial printer,
or this is a parallel printer.
It's very generalized.
It allows us to add new
backends in the future without
breaking any compatibility,
and the applications
just don't really care.
Lang environment variable set to
the language of the print job.
So if you have a French user
that submits a job,
that Lang variable will be FR,
but an English user
will get EN passed in.
So you can localize any messages
that you produce for the
user based on that language.
The path is set up to a,
to user bin and slash bin, I think.
And it just restricts what
normally gets exported.
Normally you'd get some really
long path that's inherited from the
environment and we really didn't
want to do that for security reasons.
A PPD environment variable
tells you where to find the
PPD file for the printer.
Usually it will be
under CUPS server root,
but it could be located elsewhere.
Just use that and you can
get the PPD file right away.
And then the printer environment variable
is the same name that you get in ARCV0,
but if you're writing
a script-based filter,
you can't really get ARCV0 without
having the wrong name in there.
For the RIP filters,
there's an environment variable that's
passed in for them called RIP Cache.
It determines the maximum amount
of memory that will be used
for that individual filter.
So, for example,
if you have a server that's got
five raster printers on it and
you've only got 512 megs of memory,
for example,
and these are large format printers,
you can say, "Well,
I only want to use 32 megs per
printer maximum so that if they're
all going at the same time,
I'm not going to run out of
memory just because I'm printing.
Some of the other software,
TZ for the time zone
and user are available.
They're not generally used
because they're available in
other places and it's like the
software environment variables,
not all that interesting.
Now, file filters are read from
standard input or file name that
comes in on the command line,
but every bit of output that they send
goes out on the standard output file.
This lets you pipe in to the
next filter and the next filter
and then finally into a back-end
process which talks to the printer.
Any status messages,
error messages that you want to pass
back to the scheduler or the user,
get passed on standard error.
So naturally,
in order to identify it you need to
have a little bit of a prefix string.
Just do your fprintf standard
error and put in error colon to
say it's an error or info colon to
say it's an informational message.
There's also things for page accounting
and for printer status which will
be coming in CUPS 1.2 and we'll
talk about that a little later.
Anything except for the debug
messages gets passed to the user.
So if you have an error message,
that gets logged in the error log
and it also gets put in the printer
state message so that when the
user checks the printer status,
they'll see, oh,
the printer's out of paper.
Once you've written the file filter,
you have to register it with CUPS.
There's two files you create.
One is a types file
and one's a cons file.
The types file lists a bunch
of MIME types and magic rules
to identify the file type.
For the purposes of printing,
the only rules that are of any
use are the ones that actually
look at the contents of the file.
There's also extension
rules that you can use.
Those are only used when
you're using the web interface.
So for printing, you don't really use
the extensions at all.
In this example,
we're registering the application/PDF
MIME type and we say any file that
starts with percent PDF is a PDF file.
The COPS file maps the actual filter.
It says this is the file format
that I take in and this is what
I produce coming out and the
relative cost of running that
filter and then the filter itself.
Now if you don't specify
the full path to the filter,
it'll assume it's in the
CUPS server bin directory.
If you do specify the full path,
it'll run it from wherever
you told it to run it from.
And as I mentioned before,
CUPS automatically uses
the lowest cost solution.
So if you have a new
PostScript RIP that you install
that's faster than GhostScript,
you can give it a lower cost
and it will use that one in
preference to GhostScript because
it's a better solution,
a faster solution.
You write a printer driver,
things work just a
little bit differently.
Instead of registering mine
types and conversion filters
in a special file in etc.
CUPS, you actually put the information in
the PPD file for the printer driver.
The CUPS filter attribute
specifies what filters to run
for specific types of files.
In this example,
we're saying that the CUPS raster
format can be converted to the printer's
format using raster to my printer.
It has a relative cost of 50.
If you're printing a plain text file,
you can use text to my printer
and it only has a cost of 50.
So when it goes to print a text file,
it'll choose that over going
from text to postscript,
postscript to raster,
raster to my printer.
Now, you notice in the CUPS filter line,
it only shows one MIME type.
This is because the printer MIME type,
which will be printer slash printer name,
gets the
It gets inserted there automatically.
It's assumed that any filters that you
list in the PPD file are going from one
format to the printer's native format.
Once you get out of all the filters,
it goes into a back-end process.
The back-end process actually
communicates with the printer.
So when you're printing,
and you're printing to a USB port,
it goes through the USB back-end
and all the print data comes
from one set of filters.
You reconnect that to a network port,
then it's running at one
of the network back-ends,
but the print filters stay the same.
So all that communication is
common and generalized so that
you don't have to worry about,
"Am I able to talk from this driver
to this particular back-end?"
They all use the same interface.
One of the other things that
backends do is they provide
the list of available devices.
So, for example, on the network backend,
you could actually list the available
network printers that are out there.
So when you're first setting up
your printers on your network,
it'll see the printers on the network,
list them out there,
and you'll see I've got a LaserJet 4000
here and I've got a Xerox N40 over there,
and just pick them from a list
when you're adding a printer rather
than trying to remember what the
IP address is and what protocol
they use and that sort of thing.
It can identify that stuff automatically.
Similarly,
for USB printers and for parallel
printers and for serial printers,
it'll list out what's
connected to the port.
Now another interesting thing you
can do is you can define a back end
that's kind of a pseudo back end.
It acts as an agent for another back end.
An example of this might be an SLP back
end that could go out there and see
what SLP aware printers are out there.
And then once it sees what
printers are out there,
it can query to find out
what printing services are
available and then tell CUPS,
hey,
you've got a printer over here and it
supports IPP and LPD and these others.
And then when it actually sends a job,
instead of going through
that SLP back end,
it'll use the IPP back
end or the LPD back end,
depending on how you
configure the printer.
Standard CUPS comes with
backends for parallel,
serial, USB, AppSocket,
which is the JetDirect protocol,
LPD and IPP connected printers.
There's a new FireWire interface
that's going in probably in
CUPS 1.1.16 and also in CUPS 1.2.
If you get Samba, you download it,
you configure it with CUPS support,
you'll get a program called SMB Spool.
That is the SMB backend for CUPS.
Now, a lot of people ask about what can
I do about job accounting when I've
got a thousand users and they're all
wasting the paper in my printer and what
do I do to keep track of that stuff?
Well, each job object in the server,
and it keeps track of things kind
of in an object-oriented fashion,
though it's not C++
or anything like that.
Each job object has a bunch of state
information and as long as that job
object is being tracked by CUPS,
you'll be able to query that information
and see how many pages have been printed,
what the state of the job is,
if it's being held or if it's
completed or if it aborted
because the printer said,
"Sorry, I can't print Chinese text
on the printer." You know,
whatever condition happens to occur
for the job when it's being printed,
that's reflected in that job object.
Now, when you're printing to
a non-postscript printer,
the accounting information
is 100% accurate.
We know this because
when we print a file,
we're preparing each raster
page or each text page and then
sending it off to the printer.
So we know exactly how many pages
we're sending out and so we can keep
track of the information that way.
When you go to a postscript printer,
things are a little bit
different right now.
It only uses the page comments
in the postscript file.
Normally you're printing from a
Mac client or a Windows client.
This isn't a big issue because those
systems do produce DSC compliant files.
However,
there are some applications and a lot on
UNIX that tend not to be 100% compliant.
We do the best we can,
but we can't guarantee right now
that postscript printers will
have 100% accurate accounting.
That is coming in CUPS 1.2 when we're
actually adding a back channel support
so that we can query the printer,
find out from the printer
how many pages did you print,
and then put that information
into the database.
Now, as the file is being printed,
there is a page log file that
actually lists out every file,
every file that's printed,
every page that's
printed on each printer,
what user printed it,
when it was printed.
So you can actually track down,
if you see that there was
a failure on the printer,
you can see, oh, well that was on page
four in the document.
[Transcript missing]
Now, quotas is another big thing.
How do you do quotas with CUPS?
Well, you can set quotas on
any printer or any class,
which is a collection of printers.
The quotas currently are based
on the number of kilobytes
or the number of pages,
and it can be over a
specific period of time,
or it can be just forever.
The current setup you can say,
I want to allow the users to print
100 pages per week and if they go over
that limit their jobs get cut off.
You can set one global limit
on each queue for all users.
That's something also
that is changing in 1.2.
There's actually an accounting API that
we'll be providing so that you can
plug in whatever accounting system you
want if it's based off of a database or
some other specialized functionality.
When we went out and asked
people what they wanted,
we got a thousand different answers.
So we figured that was the best solution.
Now, another big advantage of CUPS is
how it supports network printing.
Traditionally,
you have a server and then on
each client you'll configure it,
say, okay, I want to provide this printer
and this printer and this printer.
Then you go to the next client
and you do the same thing.
And if the server changes
or the queue's changed,
you have to go to every client and
change them or you have to come
up with some solution to push the
configuration files out to the clients.
Not very convenient.
Certainly for the user it can
be frustrating because if the
printing situation changes suddenly,
it won't be reflected on their systems.
So what we do with CUPS is
we use directory services.
We have two protocols
we support right now.
In CUPS 1.2 we're probably
going to be adding three more.
One of them will be zero conf.
There's also LDAP and so forth.
We'll cover that later.
The first native protocol is
called CUPS browsing protocol.
It's broadcast based,
so it doesn't go past the subnet.
It's very simple.
It just sends out,
"I've got a printer here," and then
the clients receive that and say,
"Okay," and they log it locally so
that the user will see the printer.
When the clients are assembling
their list of printers,
they can create implicit classes.
It basically means you see two
LaserJet 4000s out there and say,
"Okay, well,
we'll tell the user there's one
LaserJet 4000 and they print to it
and it'll go to the first available
one." So it's very easy to set
up not only redundant printing,
but load balance printing.
And of course if you have two labs
and they happen to be on the same
subnet but you don't want to show
the printers from one lab in one area
and the other lab in the other area,
you can filter out those
printers very easily.
Now, the CUPS browsing protocol,
like I said, is broadcast based.
It just regularly broadcasts
printer information,
its available and its current status.
When the status changes,
it sends out a new broadcast.
Each broadcast is about
80 bytes per printer.
It varies on the size of the
server name and the printer name.
And the default configuration
sends it out every 30 seconds.
When the clients receive the packet,
they will add the printer
if it's not already there.
And if it is there, it will say, "Okay,
I saw this printer,
so I'm not going to try to remove it
in the timeout interval." The default
timeout interval is like 300 seconds.
So if it doesn't receive
an update after 10 tries,
then it says,
"The server must be down or the printer's
gone away." And it will remove it
from the list of available printers.
So if you were at the
networking session before,
the laptop that got
connected to the printer,
it made the printer available
on the network and the other
computer saw it immediately and
added that to the user interface.
That's that functionality here.
Now as far as the client support,
CUPS provides native IPP and LPD support.
The IPP support is right in the
scheduler and the LPD support is
through the CUPS LPD mini daemon.
The mini-daemon approach
was chosen because,
number one, LPD is not the friendliest
of protocols to deal with,
and number two,
it was a lot easier to do it that way and
assure that the scheduler itself would
not get caught up in some state where
it wouldn't be able to recover from.
IPP supports encryption.
We use the OpenSSL library to provide
128 bit SSL and TLS encryption.
We support both persistent encryption,
so when you connect it's
always using encryption,
and also HTTP upgrade,
so that you can upgrade
from a non-encrypt,
unencrypted connection to an
encrypted connection before you
actually send the print job.
You notice if you do a man on LP or LPR,
they support an option minus capital
E that will encrypt your job.
So if you do LPR minus E, mycontract.pdf,
it'll send that job to
the CUPS server encrypted,
so that nobody else
will be able to see it.
You know, as much protection as
you can get from that.
You can enable the encryption
on all requests or you
can just make it optional.
The encryption can be required by the
client or by the server or by both.
It's a very flexible scenario.
Now as I mentioned before,
printer drivers use PPD files.
We use the standard PPD files that
you get for any PostScript printer
for Windows or Mac OS.
And if you have a
non-post-script printer,
you're still using a PPD file and
it's got some extra information
to tell CUPS that it's a
non-post-script printer file.
Besides the CUPS filter attribute,
there's also color profile attributes.
There's an attribute to specify
whether or not the printer
can produce its own copies,
and other assorted attributes
that you can use to tell the
scheduler and any filters that you
need special behavior from them.
As far as clients are concerned,
they get the PPD file for
the printer using HTTP.
The URL for printer might be
IPP://servername/printer/fu
and the PPD file would be
servername/printer/fu.ppd.
So it's very easy to get the PPD file.
The CUPS API provides a complete
set of functions for accessing this.
So if you wanted to get a PPD file,
there's a function called
CUPS Get PPD and you get a
PPD file and you can open it up
and do whatever you need with it.
Now that API provides not only
those convenience functions
for doing the day-to-day stuff
your application might need.
They also provide the low-level
functions for HTTP and IPP.
Now, like the Apple solutions,
they're all finite state machine
based and they keep track of
all the stuff for doing SSL and
TLS and digest authentication.
All that stuff is very straightforward,
very fast and very simple.
The PPD files are accessed
using PPD functions,
obviously,
and they load in all of the attributes
in the PPD file so that you can
access them from your program rather
than writing your own PPD parser.
The other part of the CUPS libraries
that are installed on the system is
something called the imaging library.
Now, aside from supporting the printer
drivers with the raster functions,
these are also used by the image
filters to load image files,
do scaling on the fly,
and do color space conversion
and color management.
This normally you wouldn't
use in your applications,
but in your filters you might
find them useful if you're
dealing with raster images.
The scaling modes that are
supported are nearest neighbor,
which is used for draft output,
and bilinear.
We're also adding bicubic in CUPS 1.2.
Now, besides the book,
there's a lot of documentation that
comes standard with CUPS for the
end user and for the developer.
There's a typical administrator's
manual that takes you
through how to set up CUPS,
how to add printers,
how to do the typical
administrative type of things.
There's a programmer's manual
that's a reference and a
tutorial for the CUPS API.
And there's the user's manual that has
all the stuff the user might need to
know on setting up printer instances,
printing files with special
options and so forth.
And of course, the ubiquitous man pages
where you do a man LPR,
man filter,
and you get your quick summary.
Now, aside from the normal kind
of documentation you get,
we have a lot of documentation
that we've generated,
primarily because we came from the
military arena and this kind of
documentation is standard there.
So there's a configuration
management plan.
If you do code submissions for CUPS,
there are guidelines in there for how the
code has to be formatted and documented.
It's very straightforward,
no stringent requirements,
just a basic this is how we do things.
There's a document that describes
the CUPS implementation of IPP.
If you're doing specific IPP requests,
you'll want to look at that document
because it does describe every single
attribute and every single operation we
support and how they're used within CUPS.
The interface design document covers
all of the interfaces within CUPS,
both internal and external.
If you're using anything
with the raster filters,
it's useful there.
A lot of the content there refers
to publicly available specifications
such as IPP and the PPD spec.
The overview document is kind of a
short version of this presentation
and it covers all of the functionality
that's in the printing system.
Software design description is
your typical high level design
document that kind of sort of gives
you an idea of what the printing
system does and how it does it,
but you really need to look
at the code because it doesn't
go to the detailed level.
Software security report is something we
developed in response to Linux vendors
specifically that wanted to know what
are the risks involved with using CUPS.
And you're providing this
IPP printing service and doing
all these things with a network.
How is that going to affect the security
on the system and what are the risks?
This document describes them.
There's a translation manual.
A lot of people have been submitting
translations for a very long time.
I'm not going to go into all the
details of the translation manual.
But I'm going to go through
the manual and I'm going to
go through the instructions.
So, the first thing that you're going
to do is you're going to go through
the manual and you're going to go
through the manual and you're going
to go through the instructions.
And then you're going to go
through the instructions.
So, that's a little bit more of a
general overview of what the
instructions are going to do.
I'm going to go through the instructions.
And then I'm going to go
through the instructions.
So, the first thing that you're
going to do is you're going to
go through the instructions.
And then you're going to go
through the instructions.
And finally,
there's a software version description
document which outlines the changes from
the old versions to the new versions.
It's pretty boring and if you
look at the change log you'll
probably get more information.
Okay,
what's coming in the new version of CUPS?
This is not what you'll have in Jaguar,
but you'll probably see
this in some future version,
I'm sure.
IP version 6 support is high on the list.
Obviously, a lot of people are looking at
this seriously now because we're
running out of version 4 addresses.
The current version of CUPS 1.2,
there is a development tree
in CVS that you can download.
That version is fully
IP version 6 functional,
except it doesn't support version
6 IP addresses and URLs yet.
That is being addressed.
It also will have full
ICC color profile support.
The beginnings of that are in there,
but not complete yet.
It should be within the month.
There's support for two new
operations from the IPP standard.
One is called Print URI,
so you can say print/dot.org and it
will go and grab the home page from
there and print it out on your printer.
And then you can print
it out on your printer.
And similarly,
send URIs used when you're sending
an individual page in a collection
of pages rather than just one.
One of the things that we get
often is people want to print
a compressed PostScript file.
You have a document from the
internet that's been gzipped.
This will allow you to do that and it
tells the scheduler that the document
is compressed and actually will send the
document to the scheduler even if it's
off in some other place in the world.
It will keep it compressed
until it gets to the server.
Another big thing is IPP notifications.
We have a lot of new events that we're
adding to the standard IPP notifications.
So whenever the printers change,
whenever you have a fault on the job,
you can get notified of that and
take whatever appropriate action.
There's three notification
methods we'll be supporting:
IPP Get, INDP and Mailto.
Mailto is probably the
one you usually use.
LDAP support, another big one.
We may be supporting authentication,
certainly the directory services
for listing the available printers.
Another big addition for the
backends is back channel support,
so you can actually feed data
from the print drivers into the
backend and then the printer
responds back with some message.
That'll make its way back to the printer
driver and you can do your chats with the
printer to find out if it's got the right
ink cartridge in there and so forth.
Mentioned before, Firewire.
There are some printers out there
that only work good with Firewire.
Why that should be, I don't know,
but they take a lot of data
and they really need the
speed that Firewire offers.
We're working on Linux right now.
We'll be adding support for Darwin.
It will be in there and it will probably
be the fastest interface we support.
There's also extended PPD options.
Right now everything's restricted
to a Boolean or pick from a list,
or pick many from a list.
We're adding support for additional
things so you can specify a number and
text and different types of attributes.
Those are going in there.
They have kind of a backwards
compatibility mode for
standard printer drivers.
So they'll see a standard PPD file
with some funny attributes
that are intermixed in there,
but they'll ignore them.
And the CUPS-aware applications will see,
oh, this is a special attribute
and I can act accordingly.
This is mostly in response to the
GIMP print project where they want to
have a slider for the gamma control
for each of the individual color
channels and the density and so forth.
Another feature that's been requested a
lot is policies for the IPP operations.
Right now, you can say, "Alright,
I only want people in this group to be
able to add printers." But that also
applies to starting and stopping printers
and accepting and rejecting jobs,
basically doing any administrative tasks.
So the new policy mechanism
will allow you to say,
"Well,
users from this group can do printer
administration on this printer." Or,
"These users are allowed to cancel jobs,
but they're not allowed to start and
stop the printer." Be very flexible.
You have total control over individual
IPP operations and print CUPS.
The new version also has
extended raster support.
One of the comments that
we've received in the past is,
"Well, you don't have enough user-defined
options in there for us to
pass into the reps." Or,
"You don't have 16-bit
per channel support," or,
"You don't have ICC color spaces." Well,
that's all coming in the new
version and it works very well.
Finally, there's full localization for
the command line interfaces.
Right now you get English.
In the future you'll get whatever
language you happen to be talking
and the interface also supports
transcoding to local character sets.
So message catalogs are in UTF-8 and
you'll get them in whatever character
set you happen to be configured for.
Just what I said.
There will be more printer drivers.
We're looking to include drivers
for Canon and also we'll probably
have the full set of Xerox,
HP, Okidata, Genicom and
I forget.
There's another printer manufacturer,
but they've all agreed to
provide us with PPDs and we can
provide them standard with CUPS.
So the number of drivers
that will be available out of
the box will be substantial.
One problem that we ran into with
USB and will probably run into with
Firewire is you disconnect a device and
then you connect a different one and
the print system still thinks it has,
you know, you disconnect an HP,
you connect an Epson,
it still thinks it has an HP connected.
There will be a new device monitor that
will keep track of those changes and
automatically update the print cues as
needed so that they can still operate.
Well, Richard mentioned the CUPS website.
There's also our website for our company.
There's the commercial version
of CUPS called ESP Print Pro that
may or may not make its way
into Darwin or into Mac OS,
but we provide a lot of
printer drivers there,
over 3,000 right now.
And then there's the GIMP Print Project,
which has all of the free drivers for
various inkjet printers primarily.
There's also OMNI and HPIJS and so on.
You go to any of these pages,
you'll be able to find links to
all of the available open source
and commercial drivers for CUPS.
A lot of add-ons for CUPS.
There's a SourceForge project
out there for those add-ons.
So it's basically any kind of
Thank you.
Richard Blaenchard: Thank you.
So, the first thing you're looking for,
a graphics panel or a printer driver,
you'll find it there as well.
And then, for any information on IPP,
go to the printer working group web page.
They're the ones that actually run
the working group for developing IPP.
They work in conjunction with
the IETF IPP working group.
In fact, most of the members are
shared between the two groups.
And that's where you'll find all the
IPP specs and all the stuff that's
And those are the RFCs
you want to look at.
2910 and 2911 are the current
IPP 1.1 specifications.
There are a bunch of new RFCs that
hopefully within the next couple
months will actually be published.
They've been in the queue
for a little over a year now.
And they're catching up.
It's been a little difficult
to get them published.
And the old LPD specification 1179,
if you have a particular
problem with an LPD client,
you can use this to reference that and
see if there's anything we're doing wrong
or if anything your client's doing wrong.
And with that...
I'm an imaging evangelist.
I'm responsible for most of the
graphics tracks here at WWDC.
What I wanted to do is sort of
bring things together for a moment.
What we've done here
is tell you about CUPS,
the printing architecture
that's being put into Darwin.
And we've told you about CUPS in terms
of what its full functionality is on
Darwin and other forms of UNIX and Linux.
There's a second part to that story,
and that story is how
Mac OS X as an operating system
is going to leverage CUPS.
And that's actually what's
happening tomorrow in Hall 2
at 10:30 in the morning.
In the printing and Mac OS X session,
we're going to spend a lot of time
communicating how we plan to leverage
CUPS and expose it in terms of UI and
functionality in the operating system.
So it's sort of the companion piece.
They're basically bookends.
So if you like what you heard in this
session and you need to find out more
about the specifics of what we're going
to plan to do with CUPS and Mac OS X,
please attend that session.
Thank you.
Now, if you need to contact me
with any questions relating
to graphics and imaging and
specifically printing and CUPS,
please feel free to send me
an email at travis@apple.com.
That's my email address up there.
And what I want to do is bring up a
Q&A panel so we can field questions
from the audience relative to what
we've spoken about here today.